.\" 
.\" Copyright (c) 2004, Stefan Walter
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without 
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions 
.\" are met:
.\" 
.\"     * Redistributions of source code must retain the above 
.\"       copyright notice, this list of conditions and the 
.\"       following disclaimer.
.\"     * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the 
.\"       above copyright notice, this list of conditions and 
.\"       the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or 
.\"       other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"     * The names of contributors to this software may not be 
.\"       used to endorse or promote products derived from this 
.\"       software without specific prior written permission.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS 
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT 
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS 
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE 
.\" COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, 
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, 
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS 
.\" OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED 
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, 
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF 
.\" THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH 
.\" DAMAGE.
.\" 
.\"
.\" CONTRIBUTORS
.\"  Stef Walter <stef@memberwebs.com>
.\"
.Dd September, 2004
.Dt proxsmtpd.conf 5
.Os proxsmtp 
.Sh NAME
.Nm proxsmtpd.conf
.Nd the configuration file for 
.Xr proxsmtpd 8
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Xr proxsmtpd 8
reads a configuration file when starting up. The location of the file is dependent
on how you compiled proxsmtp but it should usually be in either the
.Pa /usr/local/etc/
or 
.Pa /etc/
directories. If 
.Xr proxsmtpd 8
does not find its configuration file it'll print a warning when it starts up along
with the location it's expecting to find it in. You can also specify a different 
location for a config file by passing the 
.Fl f
argument to 
.Xr proxsmtpd 8
.Pp
The settings are specified one per line. The setting names come first, followed
by a colon and then the value. Comments start with the '#' character on a line 
of their own. Whitespace is ignored at the beginning of line, end of line and 
around the colons. 
.Pp
A sample configuration file can be found in the 
.Pa doc/
directory of the proxsmtp distribution.
.Sh SETTINGS
The various settings are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Ar FilterCommand
This is the command used to filter email through. If not specified then no 
filtering will be done. Specify all the arguments the command needs as you 
would on a command-line. 
.Pp
[ Default: no filtering ]
.It Ar FilterTimeout
The amount of time in seconds to wait for the 
.Ar FilterCommand
to process email data.
.Pp
[ Default: 30 seconds ]
.It Ar FilterReject
The rejection message used when
.Ar FilterType
is set to 'reject'.
.Pp
[ Default: 530 Email Rejected ]
.It Ar FilterType
When set to 'pipe' the email data is piped through the 
.Ar FilterCommand
using standard in and standard out. When set to 'file' the email data is saved
to a file and the file name is passed to the 
.Ar FilterCommand
using the 
.Ar EMAIL
environment variable.
.Pp
When set to 'reject' then email is immediately rejected using message defined
by the
.Ar FilterReject
option.
.Pp
[ Default: pipe ]
.It Ar Header
A header to add to scanned messages. Put an empty value to suppress adding
a header. You can include the following special formatting characters in the
string to include special values:
.Bl -inset
.It Ar %i 
Client IP Address
.It Ar %l 
Local IP Address
.It Ar %d 
Current Date
.El
.Pp
You can also include the standard \\r or \\n escapes.
.Pp
[ Optional ]
.It Ar KeepAlives
On slow connections the server will sometimes timeout before 
.Xr proxsmtpd 8 
is finished filtering the file. This option sends NOOP's to the server
to keep the connection alive. Specify the number of seconds, or 0
to disable.
.Pp
[ Default: 0 ]
.It Ar Listen
The address and port to listen for SMTP connections on. See syntax of 
addresses below. 
.Pp
[ Default: port 10025 on all local IP addresses ] 
.It Ar MaxConnections
Specifies the maximum number of connections to accept at once. 
.Pp
[ Default: 64 ]
.It Ar OutAddress
The address of the SMTP server to send email to once it's been scanned. See 
syntax of addreses below. 
.Pp
[ Required ]
.It Ar Skip
Whether to skip certain kinds of connections or email from running through
the filter. Specify 'authenticated' to skip SMTP authenticated connections.
.Pp
[ Optional ]
.It Ar TempDirectory
The directory to write temp files to. 
.Pp
[ Default:
.Pa /tmp
]
.It Ar TimeOut
The number of seconds to wait while reading data from network connections.
.Pp
[ Default: 180 seconds ]
.It Ar TransparentProxy
Setting this option to 'client' enables transparent proxy support, which allows
you to route all SMTP traffic that's going through a gateway through proxsmtp which
will then send it on to its final destination. This setup usually involves firewall
rules which redirect traffic to proxsmtp, and the setup varies from OS to OS.
.Pp
Specify 'full' to enable a true transparent proxy where neither the client or
server are aware of the proxy by way of the packet headers. This setup usually involves
routers to redirect traffic to proxsmtp, and the setup varies from OS to OS.
.Pp
[ Default: off ]
.It Ar User
The user to run as. If this option is specified then
.Xr proxsmtpd 8
must be started as root. It will then drop root privileges and run as the 
specified user. The user can either be a name or a numerical user id.
.Pp
[ Optional ]
.It Ar XClient
Send an XCLIENT command to the receiving server. This is useful for forwarding
client addresses and connection info to servers that support this feature.
.Pp
[ Default: off ]
.El
.Sh ADDRESSES
Addresses can be specified in multiple formats:
.Bl -bullet
.It 
Unix local addresses can be specified by specifying their full path. 
(ie: '/var/run/socket').
.It 
IP addresses can be specified using dotted notation with a colon before
the port number (ie: '127.0.0.1:3310').
.It 
IPv6 addresses are implemented but disabled. The code needs testing.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr proxsmtpd 8 
.Sh AUTHOR
.An Stef Walter Aq stef@memberwebs.com
